
some key aspects in the development of an in silico fully automated case-finding system for type 2 diabetes. 

An important point I want to illustrate is that machine learning and data mining can enable innovative uses 
of existing databases including applications of data that were never originally envisioned. 

lecture covered the development of a scalable clinical tool based on a database that is intended for
administrative use. 

From a machine learning perspective -- basics of building and evaluating classification models which are models
that predict a binary outcome: positive or negative; based on positive and unlabeled data, 
which is a twist on the usual supervised set up. 


This lecture is partitioned into three videos: in the 
first video I will describe the context of the application, with a brief introduction of key aspects of diabetes
and case-finding for diabetes. 

The second video covers the basics of Belgian health expenditure data to describe what we're dealing with
and in the 

final video, I will show an overview of the machine learning aspects involved in this use case and compare the 
resulting prototype to existing state-of-the-art and then with some general conclusions. 

Diabetes mellitus is a chronic metabolic disorder that's characterized by hyperglycemia; that is
elevated blood glucose levels. Blood glucose levels may fluctuate a lot in
healthy individuals, depending on many factors such as whether the person is
exercising or recently ate. However structurally elevated blood glucose
levels are a big problem, as this may cause serious harm to many of the body’s
systems. Chronic hyperglycemia can lead to many complications, such as kidney
failure, micro and macro vascular problems, nerve damage including loss of vision
and loss of sensitivity in lower limbs and many more. 

Insulin plays a central role in the regulation of blood glucose levels.
Insulin is a peptide hormone that is produced by pancreatic beta-cells.
Insulin lowers blood glucose levels by promoting absorption of glucose from the blood and
by suppressing glucose production and excretion by the liver. Chronic
hyperglycemia typically indicates some insulin related problem. 

Two major typesof such problems exist:
namely insulin deficiency and insulin resistance. Insulin deficiency means that
insufficient insulin is produced by the patient which may be caused by an
autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta-cells. This is particularly
characteristic for type 1 diabetes. Patients with insulin deficiency require
external insulin for survival.

Another problem is insulin resistance, which means that cells have a reduced
response to insulin, leading to reduced glucose absorption which in turn leads
to hyperglycemia. 

Insulin resistance is commonly caused by chronic obesity
during which the patient has consistently elevated glucose levels and
consequently also elevated insulin levels to absorb this glucose. 

Over time
the cells will gradually become resistant to high concentrations of
insulin. Our application revolves around type 2 diabetes mellitus which is
usually a combination of insulin deficiency and insulin resistance and
typically starts an adult age. 

Type 2 diabetes accounts for the majority of
diabetes mellitus patients. It is a highly prevalent disease. The World
Health Organization estimated the prevalence of type 2 diabetes to be nine
percent among adults over 18 years of age.
Additionally the prevalence of type 2 diabetes is rising at an alarming rate.
In Western countries this rising prevalence is driven by increasingly
sedentary lifestyles and poor diets. 

In addition to be highly prevalent type 2
diabetes is also very expensive, as the International Diabetes Federation
reports that about ten percent of national health care budgets are spent
on treating diabetes or its complications.

Finally the World Health Organization predicts that diabetes will be the
seventh leading cause of death by 2030. 

The success of treating type 2 diabetes
and preventing complications is largely dependent on the time of diagnosis of
the disease. Treatment of early-stage type 2 diabetes is often limited to
lifestyle interventions, typically targeted towards weight loss. While later
stages require strict pharmacological therapy involving one or more
glucose-lowering agents. Evidence in the literature has convincingly shown that
many complications of type 2 diabetes can be delayed or even avoided, if the
disease is caught early.


Unfortunately there is significant clinical inertia in the diagnosis of
type 2 diabetes. The international diabetes federation estimates that
globally about half of type 2 diabetes patients remain undiagnosed. In developed
countries estimates for this ratio or closer to 1 undiagnosed patient in 3,
which is still a very significant portion. An additional issue is that
patients are often diagnosed very late with the average delay between onset of
diabetes and its clinical diagnosis exceeding several years. During its
untreated face the uncontrolled blood glucose levels often cause irreparable
harm to the patient. Diagnosing type 2 diabetes is difficult because the
disease is known to have a long asymptomatic period. Without clear warning signs
the clinical inertia in diagnosing type 2 diabetes is evidenced by the fact that
diabetes diagnosis are often triggered when a patient presents with symptoms of
complications. To reduce the clinical inertia in diagnosing type 2 diabetes,
opportunistic screening of high-risk subgroups is recommended by many leading
international organizations, including the World Health Organization, the
American Diabetes Association and the International Diabetes Federation.
