
In this video, I will describe the Belgian health expenditure data which we
used to build the case finding tool for type 2 diabetes. Belgium has statutory health
insurance for all citizens. This health insurance is organized by mutual health
insurers which are nonprofit organizations. In contrast to some other
countries health insurance premiums are equal and fixed for all citizens,
regardless of age, lifestyle and risk factors. To implement their daily
operations mutual health insurers maintain large administrative databases
of health expenditure records which describe all refunded medical expenses.
The first type of medical events known to mutual health insurers is ‘medical
interventions’. Each consult results in an encoded list of interventions. The coding
scheme for interventions retains information on what happened:
that is the type of intervention, but omits all medical details, such as lab
results and diagnosis.
The second type of medical events known to mutual health insurers are refunded
drug purchases. Mutual health insurers dispose of information about which
package of drugs is refunded, which in turn contains information about the
active substances as defined in the ATC classification system and their
respective standardized volumes.
However mutual health insurers have no information about the diagnostic process
leading to a certain prescription, such as diagnosis, indications and
contra-indications. As mentioned earlier, good case finding for type 2 diabetes
mandates a comprehensive overview of a patient's medical status which obviously
requires data. Principally the patient's general practitioner should have such a
comprehensive overview.
Unfortunately this is not always the case because medical information is not
always communicated to the GP by other stakeholders such as hospitals or other
care
givers. Additionally if such communication does happen, it is often in an
unstructured way, for instance via email or another form of plain text. Which the
general practitioner then has to contextualize manually. The only
stakeholders with a comprehensive overview in Belgium are mutual health
insurers, because they record everything that is refunded for a single patient
regardless of where the expenses were made. This makes them an ideal candidate
to implement screening or case-finding methods. Our approach essentially boils
down to running a program within mutual health insurer databases. Our approach is
very scalable since it relies exclusively on data that is already
being collected in a structured way as part of the Belgian healthcare system. To
improve your understanding of the nature and size of the problem, I will now
provide some key statistics. In the next video I will describe how we approach te
learning task. In terms of number of patient we used about 30,000 positives
and 79,000 unlabeled patients to build our data set. For each patient, we
vectorized the health expenditure records of 2009 up to 2012 to build
individualized health profiles and we based labels on 2013 up to 2015.
Since we use data up to 2012 to predict outcomes of the coming years,
no information leak is present. After transforming the data into a useful
format for machine learning algorithms, each patient is represented by a vector
in roughly 16,000 dimensions. This vector representation contains basic
biographical information, like age,
gender and information about medical interventions & drug purchases. Each
distinct intervention and active substance is represented in one
dimension with additional redundancy to encode which types of drugs and
interventions are similar. As an example: a patient using insulin is more similar
to a patient using metformin than a patient using paracetamol because the
former two are both agents used to treat hyperglycemia.
While 16,000 dimensions may be intimidating at first, it is important to
realize that these vector representations are sparse since a
specific patient only ever use a small set of all available medication and
interventions. Now you have a basic understanding of the data that we used. In
the next video, I will describe how we built the predictive models to perform
case-finding.
